Dont recommend JSON for ClickStack (#6171)
ClickHouse/clickhouse-docs: docs/use-cases/observability/clickstack/ingesting-data/schema/map-vs-json.md

---
slug: /use-cases/observability/clickstack/ingesting-data/schema/map-vs-json
pagination_prev: null
pagination_next: null
description: 'When to use the Map type vs the JSON type for attributes in ClickStack'
sidebar_label: 'Map vs JSON type'
title: 'Map vs JSON type for ClickStack'
doc_type: 'reference'
keywords: ['clickstack', 'json', 'map', 'attributes', 'schema', 'observability']
---

import BetaBadge from '@theme/badges/BetaBadge';

ClickStack's [default schema](/use-cases/observability/clickstack/ingesting-data/schemas) stores resource, scope, log, and span attributes as `Map(LowCardinality(String), String)` columns. ClickHouse also supports a strongly typed [`JSON` type](/interfaces/formats/JSON), and ClickStack has beta support for using it in place of `Map`.

> **For typical observability workloads we recommend keeping the [default `Map`-based schema](/use-cases/observability/clickstack/ingesting-data/schemas).** The JSON type is available for users who want to evaluate it on workloads with a small, stable set of attribute keys, but it is not the recommended schema for general use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**For typical observability workloads we recommend keeping the [default `Map`-based schema](/use-cases/observability/clickstack/ingesting-data/schemas).** The JSON type is available for users who want to evaluate it on workloads with a small, stable set of attribute keys, but it isn't the recommended schema for general use.
```

## Why Map is the recommended default {#why-map}

> Observability data is dominated by attributes such as resource attributes, scope attributes, and span and log attributes, and these sets are typically large, high-cardinality, and ingested at high throughput. The schema you pick for those attributes is the dominant factor in ingest cost and storage layout.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Observability data is dominated by attributes such as resource attributes, scope attributes, and span and log attributes. These sets are typically large, high-cardinality, and ingested at high throughput. The schema you pick for those attributes is the dominant factor in ingest cost and storage layout.
```

`Map(LowCardinality(String), String)` stores keys and values as a single structure. The historical disadvantage of `Map` was that reading a single key required reading the entire map column. That's no longer true: ClickHouse now supports [bucketed map serialization](/sql-reference/data-types/map#bucketed-map-serialization), which splits the map into buckets so queries only read the buckets they need. Combined with [text indexes](/engines/table-engines/mergetree-family/textindexes) on map keys and values, which is how [ClickStack's default schema](/use-cases/observability/clickstack/ingesting-data/schemas) is configured, this makes `Map` selective and fast at read time without paying any ingest penalty for new keys.

In practice this means:

- **Stable ingest cost as keys grow.** Adding a new attribute key doesn't change the on-disk column layout or create new column files. Ingest cost is bounded by the data volume, not the key cardinality.
- **No metadata explosion.** The number of column files on disk doesn't track the number of unique attribute keys.
- **Selective lookups via indexes.** Text indexes on map keys and values give point lookups without scanning every row.

> - **Predictable behaviour at high throughput.** Map handles bursty, schemaless attribute sets, common in tracing and logs, without per-key overhead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Predictable behavior at high throughput.** Map handles bursty, schemaless attribute sets, which are common in tracing and logs, without per-key overhead.
```

The tradeoff lands at ingest time. Creating and managing many dynamic subcolumns introduces write-time overhead and metadata complexity. On observability workloads, which routinely have very large or highly dynamic attribute sets and high ingest throughput, that overhead is significant. The [`max_dynamic_paths`](/sql-reference/data-types/newjson#reading-json-paths-as-sub-columns) limit can cap the damage by spilling extra paths into a shared column, but accessing the shared column is slower than dedicated subcolumns, which erodes the read-time advantage that motivated using JSON in the first place.

With bucketed map serialization removing most of the historical read-time overhead of `Map`, the read-time advantage of `JSON` no longer outweighs its ingest-time cost for typical observability workloads.

## When you might still consider JSON {#when-to-consider-json}

The JSON type can be a reasonable fit when *all* of the following hold:

> - Your attribute key-set is **small and stable**, meaning you are not seeing thousands of unique keys, and new keys appear rarely.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Your attribute key-set is **small and stable**, meaning you aren't seeing thousands of unique keys, and new keys appear rarely.
```

To use JSON-typed schemas instead of the [default `Map`-based schemas](/use-cases/observability/clickstack/ingesting-data/schemas), set the following environment variables.

| Variable | Set on | Purpose |
|----------|--------|---------|
| `OTEL_AGENT_FEATURE_GATE_ARG='--feature-gates=clickhouse.json'` | OTel collector | Creates schemas in ClickHouse using the JSON type. |
| `BETA_CH_OTEL_JSON_SCHEMA_ENABLED=true` | HyperDX (ClickStack UI) | Enables the application layer to query JSON-typed schemas. ClickStack Open Source only. |

### Managed ClickStack {#managed-clickstack}

To enable JSON support in Managed ClickStack, contact support@clickhouse.com prior to configuring the collector. The feature must also be enabled in the ClickStack UI (HyperDX) in ClickHouse Cloud.

Set `OTEL_AGENT_FEATURE_GATE_ARG='--feature-gates=clickhouse.json'` on the collector. For example:

```shell
docker run -e OTEL_AGENT_FEATURE_GATE_ARG='--feature-gates=clickhouse.json' -e CLICKHOUSE_ENDPOINT=${CLICKHOUSE_ENDPOINT} -e CLICKHOUSE_USER=default -e CLICKHOUSE_PASSWORD=${CLICKHOUSE_PASSWORD} -p 8080:8080 -p 4317:4317 -p 4318:4318 clickhouse/clickstack-otel-collector:latest
```

> ### Open Source ClickStack {#oss-clickstack}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Open source ClickStack {#oss-clickstack}
```
